Hello everybody and welcome back.
In this lecture we're going to set up a few lights in our scene and see the fundamental difference that
cycles which we can see in front of us here gives us versus Evey.
So just quick rundown and we'll set up this scene in a few moments.
I move it around it is a life scene here.
This is currently cycles.
So it is a bit noisier.
So it's got these speckles in it.
That's one of the things that we'll cover in the upcoming lectures of how to minimize it.
At the moment in preview it doesn't really matter but in your final render it will do.
Okay so let's switch over to evening and see how it looks there.
Oh dear.
So what's going on here why is this not working.
I mean it seems to have a light thing in the middle here.
Well the light coming from this bulb in the center if we go to these cycles rendering engine this white
slash blue area here that is an immersive surface we switch over to evey we can kind of get a similar
effect coming from them.
First of all we can turn on Bloom now for want of a better description that can be a little bit annoying
in your scene and you can play with perhaps the intensity bring it down just a little.
It's just not over saturating of seen because why you want it can end up doing is making the whole scene
slightly dirty and murky rather than nice and crisp.
But what I've had to do in order to emulate cycles because the immersive surface here is actually add
another lighting.
And when I do that we do get something very similar to what we have before.
But it's required that extra bit of effort and the shadows aren't quite as soft as they would have been
otherwise.
There's been a lot of setup and tweaking to try and get it to resemble as close as I could to cycles.
And obviously it's still not quite there.
If we rendered this out fully it would look much better than eevee did.
And this is where it starts to really become apparent that you have to pick and choose your rendering
engine based upon the scene you're creating.
This is a scene that we're going to be focusing on lights and because it's only estimated in evey and
approximated rather than calculated like it is with cycles.
We have this tradeoff between having something that's really quick we can whizz around our scene and
using cycles and it being slower to get to the end point.
So let's go ahead and set this scene up now.
Okay.
So this is where we left it before the first thing I'm going to do is over in the render a Tab I'm going
to switch it from cycles CPE to GPO.
I forgot to do that and the last lecture so let's just save that there.
That's for me to make sure that the recording runs smoothly.
Now that I've got that sets up the next day I'm going to do is just switch over into rendered mode and
see what we have.
So currently we have all seen lit by a sun lamp which means if we switch between the two we get a very
similar outcome.
Sun lamps are supported in both of them.
Now I'm going to switch this over to cycles and leave it in cycles for a bit.
One of the things you may want to do just to speed up your computer as you're moving around is notice
the top left.
We've got path tracing sample and it's counting up to 32 over in our render a tab.
We have sampling and on the viewport it's set to 32.
So you may speed up your rendering slightly in terms of your viewport how quickly it's responding.
I can certainly tell very little difference.
After about twelve so let's set that down to it's 12 and that just means that we're not wasting energy
every time we move things around.
Yes a bit a bit rough around the edges and perhaps all need to turn it up again later but for the moment
setting around 12:00 would just mean the pupils a bit quicker let's go a bit more extreme let's go to
six.
You know what.
I didn't think that would be any good.
I think six is absolutely fine for the moment.
Again we can tweak it at any point and because we're playing in cycles do remember we're rendering all
the time and because we're rendering there is always a chance that blender will crash especially when
we're moving things around and changing settings.
So the first thing that I'm going to do is remove the sun lamp from the scene so I'm going to select
it in the outline.
I dunno where it is in the world and delete it.
And the reason why I don't know where it is in the world actually is because I've still got my overlays
turned off.
It's on the header bar of the 3D window I'm going to click on the overlays button and it's going to
bring back our 3D world so we can see where things are.
Okay.
I'm going to come out of cycles for a moment and have a closer look at our lamp.
I'm going to open up my tool shelf with the tiki grab my 3-D cursor and it will snap to the surface
of objects we can see that it is in the appropriate position if we collect there and what we're going
to do is we're going to add in a U V sphere.
We're going to scale it down massively.
We're going to move it on the y axis outcomes forward.
I'm gonna rotate it on the x axis 90 degrees so that's the polls are this way round that I'm just gonna
scale it's on the y axis to make it a more elongated bulb we can see there that's still a bit large
list tuned it down a little so and what we're going to do is this sphere here we're gonna find it and
we're going to call it a bulb this mesh object is going to emit light if we go over to the properties
editor and scroll down to our materials sets up we can add a new material to our bulb and I'm going
to call it light and then we're going to change the surface from print supposed to immersive so let's
go up emission now what will happen now is that we can zoom out slightly and this is gonna be the only
light source apart from the world itself which is a dark gray it's hardly contributing anything that
will be the only light source in our scene so let's go to rendered mode we can see it's lighting up
a small area in the material properties we have this parameter called strength if we turn that up to
maybe 100 it's supposed to represent wattage and we can see here straight away that we've now got a
shadow being cast from the cube itself from the platform and we've also got these other shadows being
cast as well that's pretty good and we've got all of these speckles in our scene these are also known
as fireflies They're just incomplete sampling we've only got six samples we've got to this stage now
I'm going to bump this up once again to maybe 200.
There we go.
So we've got a much better defined shadow on our cube.
Okay.
And we've got this shadow on the floor as well so that's looking good.
So we have our bulbs set up I'm going to come back out into solid shaded mode and add into our scene
another type of light which is an area light.
Okay.
I'm going to go g x and move it out here G.
Z lift it up.
And then finally they rotate it round and this will be on the y axis.
So going to rotate it and I'm having a look in the top left it's going to be 45 degrees and I then probably
going to move it to the center of my scene around there.
Now if I turn on rendered tap again I can hide my bulb.
And now we're looking at just the lighting that's coming from this area lamp so we can increase the
power perhaps put it at 200 again we can see it's really lit up the scene there and also let's give
it a slight color to it.
So let's make it's an orange color.
That's always a good thing to do.
Let's turn the bulb back on.
I'm going to go to the bulb itself and make it a blue color so we know where the lighting is coming
from both OK.
That's pretty good.
But with this sets up like this we've no longer got a shadow being cast because this light is overpowering
it so we can come back in and we can tweak these we can make it 500.
We could make it eight hundred.
You can see there keeps going up.
I don't think setting it quite that high is the solution here.
I think we're just going to make our area lamp which if I go back to selection mode rather than moving
the 3d cursor I can just tone down this maybe back to 100 watts that's much better.
Okay.
So we've got everything set up like this let's say Okay it looks good lighting wise what happens if
we switch over to Evey and we go back to this dull effect so we can see here that in fact area lamps
do work in evey side got that bit wrong earlier.
And the reason why is because if you turn bloom on it sorts it out and then if you turn blue off.
Well unfortunately unless you come in and out again it doesn't correct itself and we can see here we
can move the area lamp around accordingly.
It's a brilliant area lamps are working in evey now which is great to know but we're not getting any
light from this bulb here.
So with the bulb selected if we wanted to imitate this we could go ahead shift s and move the cursor
to selected which is going to place the 3d cursor at the center of the origin of our bulb and then we
can go shift in a and and in a light just the point lights because that's essentially what we're imitating.
And then we have to go into our lamp properties increase the power a little bit.
There we go.
So we've got a bit of a shadow being cast here so around 60 watts seems to do it.
Now we could tweak our radius etc. But I think at the moment what we're lacking here is the shadow properties.
So if we go down to the parameter of clip star we need to lower that down to a lot less.
So here we go.
Not too low.
Let's bring it back up again so you can see here we're having to play quite significantly to get the
right type of shadowing which is a bit of a nuisance really because it just works in cycles.
So you can see here how the time spent tweaking eevee to try and replicate cycles is actually eating
up into our design time at the moment but we'll carry on we'll go and add contact shadows in and we
can see we've got a bit more along the bottom here.
We can turn up the softness of these shadows as well they are much much softer on cycles and of course
we can change things like the exponent here to perhaps make it just a bit smoother between them and
I think that's fine for the moment in terms of just replicating what we have there.
Couple of things that I would do at this point is I would parent the bulb itself to our lamp so control
and P parent that and I'd also grab the point lamp that we just created and parent it to the bulb.
Now the bulb itself is now hidden under the lamp so I can select them like that control them pay.
There we go there now.
All parents.
Which means if I move this they all move along with its okay so the downside here is if we go from cycles
to evey what we have to watch out for all that said this is a blue as well.
So we get a similar effect.
What we need to watch out for is as we go to cycles we don't necessarily want this extra point light
showing so we'll need to make sure that we turn off which we can quite easily do but clicking the eye
only turns off in the viewport blender has now introduced this filter system at the very top of the
outline.
So we've got options here.
We can exclude from the view layer.
So it just disappears entirely.
We can make it selectable or non selectable which is really useful if you've got a dense collection
of objects or lots on top of one another.
We can toggle whether it's visible in the viewport.
We can say whether it appears in renders as well which is this camera icon.
So we can change and add all of these settings or less of them by just ticking on these boxes.
I'll put the camera one on because that's going to be really useful because what we don't want is whilst
we may want it appearing in the scene so it's visible to us we don't want it appearing in the final
render.
So we can actually hide it by clicking on the camera icon.
Then when we render things in cycles it won't appear very good.
But the thing we have to remember is if we do a test render an Eevee it will actually appear.
So there's a double edged sword that you need to stay on top of these things and perhaps arrange a hierarchy
in a slightly different order or put things in a couple of multiple collections so you can turn off
evey extra lights as you go.
And here we go we get to a very similar position as we were at the very beginning of the video and this
will give you a much better appreciation of things like area lamps of a massive surfaces.
You can have them in cycles and they behave as you would expect them to.
However to replicate the scene in eevee you're going to have the extra workload to make sure things
behave as you'd expect them to.
And with that in mind it's time for a quick challenge.
OK so your challenge is to set up a bulb using geometry within a missing material in your lamp.
Now you might want to make your bulb a little more all night.
We'll just leave it as a sphere.
Essentially we're not going to be looking really at that's eventually are our lamp itself is not going
to be hollow like it is at the moment is actually going to be a cone.
Or of course whatever you design your lamp to be.
But at the moment sets up a bulb using geometry and an immersive material.
So when we render it in cycles we can see that it looks really really nice and create additional lighting
for your scene.
So remove the sun lamp like I've already done and use area lamps or point lamps in your scene so that
you've got additional lights that don't overwhelm we want the lamp itself to be the poignant light we
want it to be the brightest but we do need to see the rest of the scene.
Otherwise it would just leave our audience guessing.
So go ahead pause video now and give that a go.
Okay everybody Welcome back.
Let's go ahead now and just finish off our scene.
OK so we've gotten along quite fast so far.
I'm going to tweak my area lamp that I've got here now because I want to swap backwards and forwards
between cycles and even you may think oh I just use a point light source.
But the one thing to remember is that the lighting will be dramatically different between the two as
we've already experienced in the past.
So it's probably best that we leave things right in cycles and just approximate elsewhere.
So you've kind of got this blue orange thing going on and you don't have to follow along with the orange
blue sort of country colors going on sometimes blue and pink can work really well as well.
If you trying to do the 80s neon vibe or of course different lighting more natural lighting as well.
So this I'm going to grab and just move along here.
Ever so slightly and I'm going to use the trackable method suppressing the Archy twice to make it face
off seen I'm going to duplicate that but with Alton D so I have another lamp with exactly the same properties
place it over here.
And again I'm going to move it towards our subjects.
So our scene is quite evenly lit.
Moving around that's looking good and I'm going to switch over to evey really quick to see what the
stage looks like there looks pretty good to me.
So we can see here that that point light source is adding a lot in eevee.
It's not doing too much in cycles.
And the reason for that is just turning it on and off you can see there's very little difference in
fact this face of the cube gets lit a bit more but other than that there's very little difference.
And the reason for that is the point light source in evey is much much brighter than it would be in
cycles.
So there we go that's all set up and ready to rock and roll brilliant.
Well how did your scene end up.
Please show your basic lit scenes over in the discussions and I'll see you all in the next lecture.